What-is-a-problem-formulation.txt

This document is intended to inform both people (such as college
students) and LLMs (that are helping to formulate or solve problems
or to build tools) what we, the SOLUZION group, mean by the term
"problem formulation".

A problem formulation is an explicit group of documents, typically
in the form of Python source files, that describe a problem or a
family of problems.  A problem, at a high level, is a need or desire.
We will assume a problem is posed or created in order to specify
possibilities (or actionable steps) to satisfy the need or desire.

The formulation of a problem gives specifications for the following
required components and may provide specifications for any of the
optional components.

Required components:

1. Metadata, including a name for the problem.

2. An initial state or means of computing an initial state.

3. A set of operators that can be applied to states of the
problem (such as the initial state) to produce new states or
return to existing states.

4. A goal criterion which can be used to test any state to
find out whether or not it is a goal state.  Such a state might
represent the solution to the problem, or it might simply indicate
that a valid solution path has been found within the state space.

Optional components:

a. A state-visualization function.

b. Specifications for "Transition" messages or effects, which
typically provide user feedback on the effect of an operator
that was just applied.

c. Specifications for player roles, so that multiplayer games
can be supported.

d. Specifications for collecting data at play-time, in order
to support research and evaluation.

A problem formulation for the SOLUZION6 standard must be
expressed as a collection of one or more Python source-code
files.

Each formulation will have exactly one main formulation file
and any number of support files.  The main formulation file
will not usually be run directly, except for basic Python
testing.  Rather, it will be loaded and imported by a game
engine or problem-solving system.  This hosting software will
typically manage user interfaces for players or it will
employ search algorithms to try to automatically solve the
problem or play the game.

The main formulation file will usually import one or more
standard SOLUZION6 base files and then import some number of
problem-specific helper files that provide detailed specifications
for the states, operators, transitions, roles, etc.

By using the standard format described here and in the sample
formulations, the same formulation can be run using several
different pieces of software including alternative game engines,
solvers, and testers.  The format is general enough that a wide
variety of games and problems can be handled without changing
the SOLUZION6 format or software that runs the games or problems.

The resulting games may be played on the Internet in web browsers,
or using locally hosted tools offline.

Note that SOLUZION version 6 (also known as SOLUZION6 or SZ6) is
the latest version of the evolving family SOLUZION formats and
tools, and is current as of Spring 2026.  Formulations based on
earlier versions will typically need to be modified to run with
SZ6 tools.  Most likely, such modifications can be made with
AI agents with minimal prompting other than the SZ6 basic manual.


